we're gonna talk about Shane Dawson and
we're gonna talk about another youtuber
a parallel but contrasting case called
basher or basher verse and we're going
to talk about the gap between motivation
and human behavior he ended up arresting
me what you say online is a big deal and
it was a big deal then - it doesn't
matter if you don't act on it what you
say online it's a big freaking deal they
ended up arresting me and I would they
put me in jail like I have never done
anything wrong in my life I was put in a
jail cell with a bunch of other people I
spent like a whole week in jail and it
was this I don't want to talk about that
I went to court I know I was scared and
they brought me up to the podium and
they said you're being charged with the
class a misdemeanor
unlawful transaction with a minor and my
lawyer was like you were so freakin
lucky because you could have gotten to
prison and stuff like that but they said
they were going to be charging me with a
Class A misdemeanor and I have to spend
community time at some community hours I
can't remember like a certain amount of
hours doing this thing at a therapist
for pedophiles basher he's notorious for
several different reasons he's displayed
several different kinds of aberrant
behavior on camera but one of the most
striking one of the most remarkable is
that he makes these over-the-top
declarations and demonstrations of his
heterosexuality
to paraphrase William Shakespeare
methinks the lady doth protest too much
I have seen this guy on camera with his
girlfriend
now his ex-girlfriend he had a
conventionally attractive girlfriend an
adult woman who has gone on to basically
do pornography on the Internet and he
would put on these gross displays where
it's not just gross because of how he's
exploiting her on camera for lack of a
better term he is trying to make money
out of he's trying to monetize her
appearance and her sex appeal to the
audience sure that's that's one aspect
that makes it gross but just just
watching this guy kiss his girlfriend on
camera it's really gross and really
disturbing and you can't shake this
feeling that he is in fact a gay man
trying to convince the audience and
trying to convince himself that he's
heterosexual through this over-the-top
performance from my perspective there
was a golden age of psychiatry
psychology psychoanalysis there was a
golden age of the sciences of the mind
and I think to be honest that Golden Age
came to an end
precisely when people tried to insist
that these were sciences they gave up
thinking about human psychology as just
an area of speculative philosophy people
tried to insist that this was a horrid
science in which you could ascertain a
disease and talk about an etiology and a
treatment and a cure there was a time
when most of what went on in psychology
was really a sort of speculative
discussion of the relationship between
motivation and action and when really
psychological discussions were much more
like the
of literature they were much more like
the analysis of a script in the theater
or in making a movie
so you guys don't have experience with
acting very often you'll have a director
and two actors you'll try doing the
scene a couple times and think okay this
isn't working and then the director will
make a suggestion okay let's do the
scene again but this time I want you to
behave as if you're jealous of her and
your motivation for doing this is not
actually that you want to succeed if
that you want this project to fail just
to get back at you know you'll have the
suggestion of definite director the
actors will think about episode and say
okay
they'll try it again and then everything
clicks everything's different everything
sounds different everything feels
different even though the lines they're
performing word-by-word
the script is precisely the same this is
one of those interesting aspects of
theater or dramaturgy analysis of script
oh my how changing the motivation
changes the certificates of the action
and by the way the director may be
saying that as a suggestion for how to
play this scene when that isn't really
what happens in the plot overall but
somehow that makes a scene more
evocative or seem more real or creates
chemistry between the characters right
but in this same way two different
people can read the same novel the same
work of literature and they can ascribe
different motivations to the characters
and you can never come to a scientific
conclusion you can never come to some
kind of certainty about what the
motivations of the characters really
were and guess what if you're looking at
videotape footage of real people doing a
real thing let's say it's a camera in a
bank that recorded a bank robbery we
recorded exactly what the people said
and did during a bank robbery you could
also have two people who were
psychological experts or what have you
you could have two two people who were
philosophers sit down and discuss why do
you think at this moment this guy says
this thing or does this thing they could
come up with different answers different
explanations you can never pin down
human motivation this sense but
nevertheless I feel like there was this
law
cost avant-garde there was this golden
age when people would really reflect on
deeply motivation and then we're willing
to speculate about what those different
motivations might be instead of leaping
ahead to a prefabricated diagnosis now
the ones you guys may be most familiar
with now or so-called bio psychiatry
where you're leaping ahead to put
someone in a box and say oh you have a
condition called bipolar disorder and we
have a drug that we assume treats that
or you have a condition called
depression and here's what that means
here are the drugs so that there's
really you know there isn't this
openness there isn't this analytical and
philosophical quality there's really the
psychiatrist or psychologist or the
therapist or analyst is sitting there
with a kind of set of pre prefabricated
boxes and question is which one are you
gonna fit into you know is this
depression or is this bipolar disorder
what is it and and ultimately each one
of those is linked to a chemical a
mind-altering drug and supposed to
suppose the treaty mmm but you're even
taking a step back from that if you look
at the early Freudian period once you
had the assent of Sigmund Freud Sigmund
Freud just became a famous author people
already really started thinking in these
very narrow pseudo scientific terms as
if were there were these pre established
patterns of behavior that you're just
going to fit people into and and what's
most sad and sick about that of all is
the assumption that human psychology is
a horror to science dealing with facts
and factors that we can know and
quantify like geometry or chemistry
right there was one statement from this
girlfriend of his say they're now broken
up one statement on the record in a kind
of group interview format bunch of
people talking over Skype or whatever it
was over voice protocol and she said she
felt she was speaking at her boyfriends
defense she said people people have
misconception when people think this guy
is a really high sex drive or that he's
pursuing all these other women around
and she said you have no idea how hard
it is to get this guy to have
just once a week she said that she had
to beg and plead and cajole him to try
to force him to have sex with her just
once a week and of course that's open to
interpretation you're never gonna know
scientifically what the guy's motivation
is or what his problem is or what have
you
right you know it could just be that he
has a low sex drive but certainly this
is compatible with the analysis or the
explanation that this guy really is
homosexual and that his performance of
over-the-top heterosexuality his you
know he's really making uh making a
display of his supposed heterosexuality
is him overcompensating for his own
sense of discomfort with his
homosexuality with his own natural
tendencies now when I look at a guy like
Shane Dawson Shane Dawson now refers to
himself as having been in the closet in
the past and he speaks very explicitly
about what his sex life now is which is
a homosexual sex life to my knowledge he
never stopped referring to himself as
bisexual rather than homosexual but when
you look at the aberrant behavior from
Shane Dawson yes I have to make a
concession that part of his aberrant
behavior is explicable just in terms of
him not being a very good comedian him
trying to command the audience's
attention trying to stay relevant trying
to stay entertaining sure that those
factors are there but part of it seems
to me like a man who was as he says
himself in the closet someone who was in
denial about his own homosexuality and
he seems to me like someone who was
making this grotesque over-the-top
demonstration of his supposed
heterosexuality his supposed lust for
women
including women who are of a dangerously
young age when I hear Shane Dawson
saying these things even though I'm
aware it's in part an attempt to grow so
the audience it's in part him being edgy
for the sake of being edgy it's in part
a joke and yet we all know it is in part
hinting at something tremendously
serious um I can't help but notice the
extent to which this sounds like a gay
man who's struggling even to understand
what it is that heterosexual men respond
to when they experience attraction to
women it seems to me that he can
understand things like hair and makeup
and clothing so that's the stuff he's
talking about and no offense but he does
not talk about those things he admires
in women the way a heterosexual man does
he talks about them in the way a gay man
relates to women's hair makeup and
clothing while putting on this grotesque
performance in which he imagines himself
as if he were an insatiable heterosexual
male someone who's not merely satisfied
with one two or three women but is
lusting after all of these women that's
again that's the sense in which this is
an over-the-top jarring disturbing
performance it's got to be over-the-top
he's got to be more heterosexual with
heterosexual he's got to overcompensate
not fairly compensate right I feel like
there's something going on here that
hints at how profoundly corrosive it is
for gay people to try to put on the mask
of heterosexuality for them to try to
compromise this aspect of their nature
and their instinct for them to try to
pretend publicly or privately to be
straight when they are
really and sincerely gay one aspect of
what I'm saying here is not provocative
at all not controversial at all
certainly not shocking in the year 2020
one aspect of what I'm saying here is
simply that living in the closet is a
profoundly warped and warping experience
that psychologically it really
profoundly damages people to pretend to
be straight when they're gay
whether that is convincing their own
parents that they're straight convincing
their co-workers or their friends or
convincing themselves and I think we can
acknowledge this goes to an even deeper
level when it's in a public context like
that so if you become a public figure
with some level of fame on social media
you're in daily contact with an audience
of at least thousands of people if not
millions and you try to convince them
that you're straight not gay and then
maybe also deepest of all every day
you've got to look in the mirror and try
to convince yourself so that is
something that can lead to demented and
aberrant behavior I think the sense in
which this suggestion is still shocking
or is controversial is that if you speak
in this way specularly about human
behavior motivation and emotional
response people will become very
defensive because they'll assume you're
thinking about this in scientific or
scientistic terms as if these are
billiard balls on a pool table you know
one ball clacks into the other and then
the next step in the process obeys the
laws of physics consistently and
predictably human emotions are not like
that at all human motivation is not like
that at all and I think when we talk
philosophically in speculate about human
psychology
it absolutely never can be that way it
is offensive to suggest to people that
if they choose to live in the closet
like if they choose to have a double
life if they decide that what's best for
their sexuality in their situation is to
lie to their parents and pretend to be
straight when they're gay in certain
contexts that that will necessarily lead
to the kind of aberrant behavior
we've seen from shane dawson and pastor
i would not make that claim at all i
think that you can look at case studies
of two different people or ten different
people who've lived through exactly the
same trauma and respond to it in totally
different ways you can look at case
studies of two different people or ten
different people who cope with the same
kind of stress same kind of terrible
experience in their lives and came up
with different creative responses to it
and in some cases it's not even a
difference in terms of creativity like
consciously and intentionally coming up
with a response to it sometimes it's
just in the level of unexamined instinct
how they respond to these things however
i think when you examine these two case
studies of aberrant behavior basher and
shane dawson and you're not just looking
at people who chose to do these extreme
and even illegal things on camera for
the public for the sake of fame
we cannot explicate what she does and
did as if it were a contrived act in
order to achieve fame or stardom that
doesn't make any sense at all gay or
straight male or female a lot of people
are powerfully motivated by the notion
of what is normal
wanting to be normal and they may never
even stop to examine what this notion of
normal really means or where it came
from or how it is that they had this
deep-seated assumption that being gay
and being normal or to different things
they can't accept themselves as normal
if they're gay a lot of people are
motivated by and even haunted by the
notion of parental approval of doing
things their parents would approve of
doing things that would make their
parents proud and and sometimes they
don't even question whether cut the
carrots their particular parents would
approve of them being gay you'd pull off
known cases of that people just
assume their parents would be horrified
disappointed the who they were gay and
maybe maybe be surprised maybe her
parents can be a bit more philosophical
your parents in particular and maybe not
these kinds of unexamined fixed ideas
that people get attached to you they
lead to aberrant behavior they motivate
people to unspeakable acts of
desperation most often in private but
now more than ever before it gets
documented and exposed here on social
media I think it's very significant
that both Shane Dawson and basher tried
to reach back to their personal history
of some kind of childhood trauma to
contextualise there are at ulta burned
behavior to elicit sympathy from the
audience to rationalize to display
themselves as the victim rather than the
perpetrator these patterns are I think
widely observed widely understood but
maybe the deepest pattern of all was
this yearning to be normal to be
approved of by your parents and to wear
that mask
that lets you feel like you're part of
the heterosexual majority as
homosexuality becomes more and more
accepted in Western cultures I think we
now get into a deeper and deeper sort of
questioning about the significance of
those who choose to live in the closet
something that wouldn't be surprising if
you travel back in time 200 years or if
now you get an airplane and go to an
openly homophobic culture or like Saudi
Arabia there's a questioning here of to
what extent it becomes imperative for
the sake of your mental health simply
put to refuse to live a lie I mean
people like to disrespect my truth but
the fact is that you know my name is I
don't know